---
layout: post
title: Call .done() at the end of your promise chains
---
**tl;dr** If you're using the [q promise library](https://github.com/kriskowal/q), you need to either return your promise from a function, or you need to call .done().

The [q promise library](https://github.com/kriskowal/q) is widely used in Node applications, especially those that use [AngularJS](https://angularjs.org/) on the front end. This is because AngularJS has a version of q built into it.

Here's a mistake using q I've made myself, one I've noticed many others make. The q documentation is pretty clear, but it is also long and buries some important details alongside information that will be irrelevant for most developers.

Consider the following use of promises:

```javascript
/** doSomethingAsynchronousWithProcessedFile.js */

function getAndProcessFile(){
    return getFile().then(processFile());
}

function doSomethingAsynchronousWithProcessedFile(action, processedFile){
    throw new Error("Action " + action + " not supported.");
}

var action = "save";

getAndProcessFile().then(function(processedFile){
    return doSomethingAsynchronousWithProcessedFile(action, processedFile);
});
```

Assume that no errors occur in the code until `doSomethingAsynchronousWithProcessedFile()`.

So what happens if we run this code? Answer: nothing, at least if we're using q. The file will be acquired and processed, but nothing else will happen. The error thrown in the doSomething function won't show up anywhere. It will be *swallowed.*

Stop swallowing my errors
--------------------------
How do stop errors from being swallowed? If one has any experience with q at all, one might propose this refactor:

```javascript
getAndProcessFile().then(function(processedFile){
    return doSomethingAsynchronousWithProcessedFile(action, processedFile);
}).catch(function(err){     //fail if we're using AngularJS
    //Log the error
    console.log(err);
});
```

Does it work? Sort of. At least now we get an indication of the error. You might think we could also add a catch block to `getAndProcessFile()` if we need to do something different about errors that occur in the execution of the getting and processing of the files.

`catch()` ensures the errors further up the promise chain won't be swallowed. But it doesn't ensure that for *all* errors in the chain. In particular, it won't help in two cases:

1.  If an error is thrown in `catch()` itself.
2.  If an error occurs further down the chain.

How does 1 occur? Here's an example, pretty close to one I've seen in the wild:

```javascript

getAndProcessFile().then(function(processedFile){
    return doSomethingAsynchronousWithProcessedFile(action, processedFile);
}).catch(function(err){
    throw err;      //this error is going NOWHERE
})
```

This code effectively mutes the catch block, negating its usefulness. That's not to say you *never* want to rethrow an error inside a catch block. Maybe you do. Maybe the type of error matters. Maybe some errors just need to be logged, but others need to be rethrown. Regardless, you can't JUST rethrow the error. You need to end the promise chain.

How does 2 occur? Here's another example:

```javascript

getAndProcessFile().then(function(processedFile){
    //Suppose this call returns the processedFile after performing the action on it.
    return doSomethingAsynchronousWithProcessedFile(action, processedFile); 
}).catch(function(err){
    console.log(err);
}).then(function(processedFile){
    return doSomethingElseAsynchronousWithProcessedFile(processedFile);
});

function doSomethingElseAsynchronousWithProcessedFile(processedFile){
    var promises = [];
    //Do a whole bunch of different asynchronous things with the processedFile, storing a promise for each in a promises array.
    promises.push(someAsynchronousThing(processedFile));
    promises.push(anotherAsynchronousThing(processedFile));
    promises.push(yetAnother(processedFile));
    //Etc.

    //Return one promise that is fulfilled when all the component promises are fulfilled.
    return Q.all(promises);
}
```

The function `doSomethingElseAsynchronousWithProcessedFile()` might push literally dozens of other promises onto its array. Any one of those promises might itself be the result of a long promise chain, and some of those chains might *not* use a catch block to catch errors.

What happens if that's the case? Those errors will get swallowed.

Okay, really. Stop swallowing my errors
----------------------------------------
Even if we could guarantee a `catch()` after every `then()`, through all the chains, that wouldn't be enough to stop errors from being swallowed. Because those catch blocks might still be throwing errors on their own, whether accidentally or on purpose.

What if we include a catch block at the very end of the top level promise chain? Better, maybe, but presumably we still want to recognize the possibility of an error getting thrown in that block.

Solution: a promise must be the return value of some function, or you must be `.done()` with it.

```javascript

getAndProcessFile().then(function(processedFile){
    return doSomethingAsynchronousWithProcessedFile(action, processedFile); 
}).then(function(processedFile){
    return doSomethingElseAsynchronousWithProcessedFile(processedFile);
}).catch(function(err){
    if(err instanceof SeriousError) {
        throw err;
    } else {
        console.log(err.message || err);
    }
}).done();
```

If the error is serious, we rethrow it. If it isn't, we log it. But to ensure that the serious errors bring the program to a halt, we have to use `done()` to make sure they bubble all the way up.

Without `done()` here, we would have the worst of all possible worlds: our non-serious errors would get logged, and our serious errors would be swallowed.

What about `finally()?`
------------------------
You can use `finally()` in your chain to execute code that needs to happen whether or not an error occurred in the chain. But what if an error occurs in the `finally()` block, whether accidentally or on purpose?

In short, you still need to use `done()`.
